## Implementing AI-based revision into the Manubot publishing ecosystem

We propose a human-centric approach for the use of AI in manuscript writing, which consists of the following steps:
1) human authors write the manuscript content;
2) an LLM revises the manuscript, generating a set of suggested changes;
3) human authors review the suggested changes, and the approved edits are then integrated into the manuscript.
By focusing on human review, this approach attempts to mitigate the risk of generating incorrect or misleading information.
To implement this human-centric approach, we developed a tool called the Manubot AI Editor, which is part of the Manubot infrastructure for scholarly publishing [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128].


### Overview of the Manubot AI Editor

![
**AI-based revision applied on a Manubot-based manuscript.**
**a)** A manuscript (written with Manubot) with different sections.
**b)** The prompt generator integrates metadata using prompt templates to generate section-specific prompts for each paragraph.
If a paragraph belongs to a non-standard section, then a default prompt will be used to perform a basic revision only.
The prompt for the Methods section includes the formatting of equations with identifiers.
All sections' prompts include these instructions: *"the text grammar is correct, spelling errors are fixed, and the text has a clear sentence structure"*, although these are only shown for abstracts.
Our tool allows the user to provide a custom prompt instead of using the default ones shown here.
](images/figure_1.svg "AI-based revision applied on a Manubot manuscript"){#fig:ai_revision width="75%"}

The Manubot AI Editor is an AI-based revision infrastructure integrated into Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128], a tool for collaborative writing of scientific manuscripts.
Manubot integrates with popular version control platforms such as GitHub, allowing authors to easily track changes and collaborate on writing in real time.
Furthermore, Manubot automates the process of generating a formatted manuscript (e.g., HTML, PDF, DOCX; Figure {@fig:ai_revision}a shows the HTML output).
Built upon this modern and open paradigm, our Manubot AI Editor ([https://github.com/manubot/manubot-ai-editor](https://github.com/manubot/manubot-ai-editor)) includes three components:
1) a Python library that provides classes and functions to read the manuscript content and its metadata, calls the LLM for automatic text revision, and writes the results back;
2) a GitHub Actions workflow that uses our Python library within GitHub to preserve provenance information for transparency;
3) a prompt generator that integrates the manuscript's metadata using prompt templates to generate section-specific prompts for each paragraph (Figure {@fig:ai_revision}b).


The GitHub Actions workflow enables users to easily trigger an automated revision task on either the entire manuscript or specific sections of it.
When the action is triggered, the manuscript is parsed by section and then by paragraph (Figure {@fig:ai_revision}b), which are then passed to the language model along with a set of custom prompts.
The model subsequently returns a revised version of the text.
Our workflow leverages the GitHub API to generate a new pull request, allowing the user to review and modify the output before merging the changes into the manuscript.
This workflow assigns text attribution to either the human user or the AI language model, which may be important in light of potential future legal decisions that could reshape the copyright landscape concerning the outputs of generative models.


We used the [OpenAI API](https://openai.com/api/) for access to these models.
Since this API incurs a cost with each run that depends on the manuscript length, we implemented a workflow in GitHub Actions that can be manually triggered by the user.
Our implementation allows users to tune the costs to their needs by enabling them to select specific sections for revision instead of the entire manuscript.
Additionally, several model parameters can be adjusted to further tune costs, such as the language model version (including the current GPT-3.5 Turbo and GPT-4, and potentially newly published ones), how much risk the model will take, or the "quality" of the completions.
For instance, using Davinci models, the cost per run is under $0.50 for most manuscripts.


### Implementation details

To run the workflow, the user must specify the branch that will be revised, select the files/sections of the manuscript (optional), specify the language model to use, provide an optional custom prompt (section-specific prompts are used by default), and provide the output branch name.
For more advanced users, it is also possible to modify most of the tool's behavior or the language model parameters.


When the workflow is triggered, it downloads the manuscript by cloning the specified branch.
It revises all of the manuscript files, or only some of them if the user specifies a subset.
Next, each paragraph in the file is read and submitted to the OpenAI API for revision.
If the request is successful, the tool will write the revised paragraph in place of the original one, using one sentence per line (which is the recommended format for the input text).
If the request fails, the tool might try again (up to five times by default) if it is a common error (such as "server overloaded") or a model-specific error that requires changing some of its parameters.
If the error cannot be handled or the maximum number of retries is reached, the original paragraph is written instead, with an HTML comment at the top explaining the cause of the error.
This allows the user to debug the problem and attempt to fix it if desired.


As shown in Figure {@fig:ai_revision}b, each API request comprises a prompt (the instructions given to the model) and the paragraph to be revised.
Unless the user specifies a custom prompt, the tool will use a section-specific prompt generator that incorporates the manuscript title and keywords.
Therefore, both must be accurate to obtain the best revision outcomes.
The other key component to process a paragraph is its section.
For instance, the abstract is a set of sentences with no citations, whereas a paragraph from the Introduction section has several references to other scientific papers.
A paragraph in the Results section has fewer citations but many references to figures or tables and must provide enough details about the experiments to understand and interpret the outcomes.
The Methods section is more dependent on the type of paper, but in general, it has to provide technical details and sometimes mathematical formulas and equations.
Therefore, we designed section-specific prompts, which we found led to the most useful suggestions.
Figure and table captions, as well as paragraphs that contain only one or two sentences and fewer than sixty words, are not processed and are copied directly to the output file.


The section of a paragraph is automatically inferred from the file name using a simple strategy, such as if "introduction" or "methods" is part of the file name.
If the tool fails to infer a section from the file, the user can still specify to which section the file belongs.
The section can be a standard one (abstract, introduction, results, methods, or discussion) for which a specific prompt is used (Figure {@fig:ai_revision}b), or a non-standard one for which a default prompt is used to instruct the model to perform basic revision.
This includes *"minimizing the use of jargon, ensuring text grammar is correct, fixing spelling errors, and making sure the text has a clear sentence structure."*


### Properties of language models

The Manubot AI Editor uses the [Chat Completions API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/text-generation/chat-completions-api) to process each paragraph.
We have tested our tool using the Davinci (`text-davinci-003`, based on the initial GPT-3 models) and GPT-3.5 Turbo models (`gpt-3.5-turbo`).
All models can be adjusted using different parameters (refer to [OpenAI - API Reference](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat/create)), and the most important ones can be easily adjusted using our tool.


Language models for text completion have a context length that indicates the limit of tokens they can process (tokens are common character sequences in text).
This limit includes the size of the prompt and the paragraph, as well as the maximum number of tokens to generate for the completion (parameter `max_tokens`).
To ensure we never exceed this context length, our AI-assisted revision software processes each paragraph of the manuscript with section-specific prompts, as shown in Figure {@fig:ai_revision}b.
This approach allows us to process large manuscripts by breaking them into smaller chunks of text.
However, since the language model only processes a single paragraph from a section, it can potentially lose the context needed to produce a better output.
Nonetheless, we find that the model still produces high-quality revisions (see [Results](#sec:results)).
Additionally, the maximum number of tokens (parameter `max_tokens`) is twice the estimated number of tokens in the paragraph (one token approximately represents four characters, see [OpenAI - Tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer)).
The tool automatically adjusts this parameter and performs the request again if a related error is returned by the API.
The user can also force the tool to either use a fixed value for `max_tokens` for all paragraphs or change the fraction of maximum tokens based on the estimated paragraph size (two by default).


The language models used are stochastic, meaning they generate a different revision for the same input paragraph each time.
This behavior can be adjusted by using the "sampling temperature" or "nucleus sampling" parameters (we use `temperature=0.5` by default).
Although we selected default values that work well across multiple manuscripts, these parameters can be changed to make the model more deterministic.
The user can also instruct the model to generate several completions and select the one with the highest log probability per token, which can improve the quality of the revision.
Our implementation generates only one completion (parameter `best_of=1`) to avoid potentially high costs for the user.
Additionally, our workflow allows the user to process either the entire manuscript or individual sections.
This provides more cost-effective control while focusing on a single piece of text, wherein the user can run the tool several times and pick the preferred revised text.


### Installation and use

The Manubot AI Editor is part of the standard Manubot template manuscript, referred to as rootstock, and is available at [https://github.com/manubot/rootstock](https://github.com/manubot/rootstock).
Users wishing to use the workflow only need to follow the standard procedures to install Manubot.
The section "AI-assisted authoring," found in the file `USAGE.md` of the rootstock repository, explains how to enable the tool.
Afterward, the workflow (named `ai-revision`) will be available and ready to use under the Actions tab of the user's manuscript repository.
